It was a designated area where a division size unit
could go in and train. Flinders Range it was
called. So we trained there and after that phase we
were sent up to New Guinea. Yeah, that would make
sense. But again, we were put into New Guinea at Oro
Bay and still didn't have a mission. Is that
December 43? That was December 43. I guess we got
there in January. 44. 44. Okay, but let's not leave
Australia yet. I'd like to ask a couple of
questions. All right. I'd like to know about the
relations between our allies, between the
Australians, who are our allies, and the United
States. First on the military level, did you train
with the military? And then on the people level,
what were your relations with the civilians?
Well, that was another good experience. I guess I
sound like to you that I never had any bad
experiences. Maybe I just put those in the back of
my mind. But as I told you earlier, in my 30 years in
the Army, I never had a bad job. I'm only one son of a
bitch boss. And that's true.
The Australians were magnificent. They were
delighted to see us come. The threat of the
Japanese was very real. And they, today, We'll
credit General MacArthur and his strategy and his
troops with saving Australia from probably a
devastating invasion by the Japanese. General
MacArthur's as big a hero as Australia has from
anywhere, including Australia, Australians.
But now remember that when we got there, the vast
bulk of the Australian Army was committed to
Europe, actually to Africa. And so there weren't
many Australian troops that we went into combat
with. But of course we had the Army facilities
there and support, and we had some of the troops go
into the islands with us. The people, and they were
magnificent soldiers. They were good soldiers.
They were magnificent soldiers. Well-trained?
Well-trained, and of course, in war, it's the
motivation and the determination by the man and
his team and his units and so forth that win.
Training's important to it, but it's the will.
Easy to work with. And they had the will, and
there's no doubt about it. Was it easy to work with
them? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. No problems with
communications or anything? No, as a matter of
fact, my comment and feeling was that the
Australians were much more like Texans in their
outlook and
feelings and so forth than they were British. In
other words, they've been very close allies of the
British during all their years of existence. They
were members of the Commonwealth and so forth. But
really, they remind you very much of Texans, the
one that I observed came to notice. In what way?
They're very open. They're very frank.
They're a little bit, I don't know, they're a
little bit braggadocious.
There are just several things about them that
reminded me of that, you know, we had a lot more in
common than they had in common with the British.
And I say Texan because we're different, I think,
than the rest, don't you? Now that you've been down
here. You know, and the way we talk and our openness
and frankness, sometimes it's called crudeness,
depending on who's observing it and under what
circumstances. So you had excellent relations
with the armed
No problem as far as any, throughout the war, no
problems that you can remember? No episodes? Oh, I
didn't. I know there were episodes. I, you know,
individual episodes. But that's going to happen
Saturday night in Coffman. Sure. Now, we have
never experienced this on a large scale, but here
was a case where the boys' and girls' pictures It
was always real. Here were all these Yankees
coming into Australia and most of the soldiers
were gone to Europe, you know. So that created some
frictions. But I must say that all the people in
Australia, the civilians, whether they were
government officials or heads of families or
girls, and there weren't many young men available
by God except in uniform. They were just like we
were. They were just drafting everybody that was
They
were all very nice to us, and it wasn't just the
girls falling for the Yanks. It was that we were
just all very congenial. I know you read, I'm sure,
that somebody's always going to write about the
boy and girl situation. Any major problems as far
as you were concerned with the boy and girl
situation? In fact,
we were very busy in Australia. I never really
came to know Australian civilians of any kind
until I was one of the lucky few that got a leave back
from the islands a year later to go to Sydney on two
weeks leave, recreation leave. And that's when I
really, the only time that I, and it turned out I
didn't get transportation back for another week,
I guess it was. And Sydney's the main city. And
that's the only time that I really was exposed to
civilians.
But there I was. I did get to know some of them. 20
years later, 25 years later, the Australians put a
few troops In Vietnam? Yes. Could you compare the
troops in the 40s with those that they put in in the
1960s? Only by reputation, because I was in
Vietnam a year and a half, and I spent all of that
time with the 1st Cavalry Division. And I never was
close to the Australian units in there. But they
were highly regarded. very highly regarded. They
had a brigade in there, as I recall, a reinforced
brigade, which is relatively small, or maybe they
called it a regiment.
But our troops respected them. They're very fine
and courageous soldiers, and they're well
trained. Now, of course, the difference is that To
the best of my knowledge, Australia did not
mobilize for the Vietnam War. So we were looking at
the career soldiers, the professionals, rather
than the World War II, everybody's in it. Now, the
difference mainly is in age, average age. The
average age of our World War II soldier was, I
think, 20 and a half. every day looking at
everybody in the Army, 21 maybe. Vietnam, it was
just a little bit more, the average. That means
that although we had more senior in years officers
in grade and non-commissioned officers, still
your buck was those youngsters. And remember, and
I believe I'm correct, that we could, we drafted a
drafted younger in Vietnam in World War
II. Okay, then let's continue. You moved on to New
Guinea in January of 1945 or 44. This
had been a major front.
New Guinea, at that time, they had won the big
battle for
What was the name of the mountain?
That the Japanese were threatening to take that
lower coast of New Guinea, which would have been
very dangerous for the Australians. That battle
was won. And so MacArthur was facing on up,
figuring out how he was going to leapfrog through
the island. And we sat there at New Guinea, really,
until we went to the Admiralty Islands. The only
mission we had other than training for those few
weeks was, well actually a few months, was
supporting the Marines on New Britain. And we'd
actually load our trucks and our men with
resupplies, ammunition mainly, and security
troops onto Navy ships to go up and resupply the
Marines in New Britain. And then one day, we got our
first mission, and that was to go into the
Admiralty Islands and seize Maumotiair Field,
landing on Los Negros Island, and then expanding
into Manus, the bigger island, the outlying
islands, and cleaning them out of there. Now the
Admiralty Island, you might recall, was just
above New Britain, and that's sort of outflanking
New Britain. New Britain had been a major base for
the Japanese.
And once we got in there, we then were busy from
there on. We were one invasion after another.
After we cleaned up there, then we went on up to—
Okay, when did you land there? We landed there in
March— March of 44. What were your feelings about
going into combat? Probably typical. I guess the
main feeling was, are we going to be good enough to
get this done quickly and successfully?
And, of course, you always,
aside from winning, or in addition to winning, you
always want to keep the casualties low. And I must
say that... While General MacArthur's influence
was not direct, I do credit him by virtue of the
strategies he followed and the targets he
selected for invasion, the objectives he
selected. I've always credited him with keeping
casualties to a minimum in the Pacific. Now, that
wasn't all for humanistic reasons. The fact was
that he was second in line for replacements.
And if he took severe casualties, he didn't know
when he might get them replaced. So it was a
two-sided consideration.
Did you ever have an opportunity to meet the
general? I never shook his hand. I saw him several
times because he was he was uh that was a kind of a war
that the general couldn't visit every outfit
every week but when we uh because you know we were
all over the map but uh when he committed us to an
operation he was always there the day we landed or
the day after i'll never forget you've seen the
famous photograph of General MacArthur coming
ashore and saying, I have returned, and it was on
Lady Island, and I did not see that coming ashore,
but I saw him the next morning, and it was rather
interesting how that happened.
I don't know, there were four divisions in the
assault in that landing on Lady. Our first cavalry
division was the Northern was the capital city of
Tacloban of the Isle of the Lady
I don't know how many landing craft the large ones
you know that put their ramps down and the vehicles
come off LSTs I don't know how many we had in that
line and that was a beautiful beach but for some
reason
we hit a sandbar about 100 feet from shore, and they
could not get that ship over that sandbar. All the
rest of them, right on the right, right on the left,
were right up hugging the beach. The squadron
commander was aboard that ship, and he would not
replace it anywhere else. Well, I guess he
couldn't. There was no other place to put it. So we
unloaded that ship through that water. Every
vehicle, every gun, Every soldier went through
that blame. How deep was it? Well, it was about
chest deep to a man at the average tide, the high
tide. But anyway, it took us all night to get our
ship unloaded. The first thing we got out, of
course, were our guns, and they went into action,
the 105 howitzers.
And next morning, having just completed this, my
unit. I was executive officer, number two, second
in command of that battalion. The battalion
command went forward with it, and I unloaded the
ship, and we'd sent all the vehicles forward in
just a few hundred yards in there, and so I decided I
was going to walk. Hadn't slept a wink all night,
and there was a trail there, a little road that went
down there. Well, I just turned off the beach
walking up that road and I heard the two jeep's
horns all of a sudden sounding look around and here
was Joe MacArthur and his staff coming in to take a
look at what was being done and I had the greatest
admiration and respect for him but I I really
wasn't impressed I was so dang tired I could hardly
walk down that road but anyway typically he went on
forward, and every time he visited our division,
our division commander would be nervous because
General MacArthur wanted to be right up there,
right up there where the front forward shooting's
going on, you know, and you always worry about, he
didn't, but the responsible commander, whether
it be the division commander and the regimental
commander and right on down were very much
concerned with him, but he was good in that regard
of having absolutely no
regard for his personal safety, which is to some
extent a disregard for the comfort of his
subordinates, but he let the men know that he was a
part of that war. I guess that's the closest I was
ever to him, but he didn't have to be present to be
respected because he had a way of projecting his
command influence right down to the last soldier,
I thought. Let's go back to your very first
invasion. Tell me about it. How'd it go? Well, it
went very successfully. We did have a lot of
casualties in the first squadron. See, the
Calvary designation is troop instead of company.
squadron instead of battalion, and then your
regiment terms, the rest of them were the same. The
reinforced squadron went in initially, and
before the next squadron landed, they took very
heavy cavalry, but they just really— Right on the
beach? No, they got off the beach. In fact, they
were very successful because of the surprise of
getting ashore, and of course that's the most
important thing. And what time was it? Did you
launch the attack? You know, I don't remember. I
wasn't in that initial assault. That was the first
brigade. My brigade, the second brigade that I was
with, came, as a matter of fact, several days later
because the mission of that squadron was a
reconnaissance in force, if that means anything
to you. No, what does that mean? That means go in
there and find out what's there and be prepared to
pull off after you determine it and come back.
Well, this was a squadron of about 500 men with
Brigadier General Chase in command. He was
commander of the 1st Brigade. Squadron
commander, Colonel Lobet. But they did a
beautiful job. And when MacArthur came ashore,
and they got ashore so beautifully, withstood
that initial counterattack so well. That's when
they took most of those casualties after the
Japanese had time to react. General MacArthur
came ashore and said, hold on. We're going to just
stay here and clear up this whole series of islands
and we'll send you reinforcements. So then they
sent the rest of the division in. Now, our
particular... So you went in with artillery? I
went in with the 2nd Brigade, with the 6th 1st Field
Artillery Battalion, and we had the 8th Regiment
in that assault, the 8th Regiment of Cavalry, and
the 7th. But now we went in on the opposite side of
the island, These first assaults, well, it was
mainly to envelop the enemy that remained there,
take the pressure off of the 5th Cavalry.
And then coming in, there was one, there were two
little islands, there was a ring of islands that
joined, hooked up Los Negros Island with the main
island of Manus, almost hooked it up. It was very
open on the end. We came in between the first and
second island, away from Los Negros.
No problem. Very narrow channel there between
those two.
And the cavalry assaulted. We came ashore and set
up to support artillery. It was just a short time
and not very heavy fighting before the two forces
joined up. And so then it was a matter of simply
consolidating on Los Negros and then after that
the division operated to clean up Los Negros
Island, this string of islands, and then later go
on to the big Manus Island. Now Manus Island became
a major neighbor base after we took it. In fact, I
guess that was the biggest naval base away from
Hawaii and away from the United States.
One little interesting detail,
we later occupied the island that was on our right
as we came in that channel for that invasion.
And as a matter of fact, we set our battalion up in
positions there to support the assault on Manus
Island, the big island. Where the airfield was
stationed. Well, the airfield was on Los Negros,
but the naval base was built. There was a beautiful
harbor there, Seattle Harbor. The Japs had a minor
little naval facility there, but it became a major
U.S. naval base. Anyway, once we got on that
island, that tip that we passed by had two naval
guns on it. Nobody saw when we went in there. And
nobody fired at you? And nobody fired at us. Oh,
why? Were the Japanese? I'll never know because,
of course, we had to invade that little island and
there were Japanese on it, but not a lot. Were they
out of ammunition? No. We had one of them shooting.
Our
executive officer, our service battery, had one
of those guns shooting within two hours after we
got on there. And we shot their ammunition. over in
support of our troops. Why they shot, I'm sure, why
they didn't shoot when we came in there,
obviously, our headquarters had reason to order
them not to. I don't know what it was. What about
that airstrip? Did you have any problems taking
it? Were there any airplanes there?
No, there were no problems. No airplanes by that
time? Had they been destroyed by our—? There were
no airplanes there. The only problem resulted in
the Japs trying to counterattack and trying to
take it back,
trying to knock our troops off. But it was put into
operation very promptly. The usual pattern was
they'd send a CB's unit in there, you know, and get
it going. And they'd build a steel-reinforced
runway?
You know, I believe it was, I don't recall whether
that was rebuilt. Now, we had to improve it, but
later we were running B-24s off of it, so it had to be
improved considerably. But whether it was
concrete or asphalt, I'm not sure. I just don't
remember. Because they had those big steel planks
that they used to put together. I'm
sure we used that. I think probably what it was was a
light asphalt with those,
what do we call those steel, they had a name. By the
inventor's name, I guess it was. Perforated
steel. In other words, in your first assault, you
didn't take very many casualties. Looking at the
division as a whole, no. In that initial squadron,
they took quite a few. But not in yours. What were
your feelings after you landed, after you
realized that you made it? Well, I think we all felt
this is the first test, and we passed it, and we had a
lot of confidence, self-confidence, a lot of
confidence in our units. This thing, of course,
The ugly part of these campaigns come in the
so-called cleaning them out, cleanup
operations. And were there many on this island?
Were there many cleanup operations? Yes, there
were, because most of the troops, after they
failed in that counterattack, tried to pull back
and evade
our attacks. But they still were good at setting up
ambushes, and occasionally we'd hit a tough
position where they were ordered to stand. There
weren't an awful lot of them there. It's just
tedious doing it, and it's such a sweaty, tough
hacking job through that jungle for those guys
that have to go up there and be the forward troops in
it. Our job was to try to
kill as many Japanese and dominate much terrain
with firepower and save as many lives and as much
sweat as we could. Eventually, of course, the
infantry's got to take it, but there was a lot of
satisfaction being a direct support
artilleryman because that team became so close
and those troops relied so much on us. And I never
saw such greater dedication to anything than the
typical our tournament realizing they're
dependent on us we're here because of them you know
then they're very effective and firepower we can
get into greater discussions on this but we in this
nation have been fortunate to have the means to
afford sure vast superiority in firepower That
has saved us more lives than strategy or good
tactics or anything else, in my opinion. But, of
course, I'm heavily oriented. Not just
artillery, but air support, naval support, the
whole thing. We used a lot of naval support in World
War II in the Pacific and relied upon it. That was
our long-range artillery that in Europe would
have been in the form of Corps and Army artillery.
Our Corps Army artillery was pretty scarce the way
we operated in the Pacific in those years.
So as far as casualties were concerned, the
infantry took the run in the casualties and not the
artillery. The artillery in that war was not
subjected to the casualty means that our people in
Europe were. the Japanese very seldom brought
artillery to bear on us. And we, the artillery on
our side, is the first target of the artillery of
the enemy because we're so effective with ours.
Okay, well then let's go on to the next campaign.
This lasted from March 1944 until about when did
you? We invaded Lady Island in October. in October
of 1944. Right, and at Lady Golf were you part of the
naval battle which was the largest naval battle of
the Second World War? We were very much aware of it.
Were you out on a ship? No, we were ashore at the
time. You see this naval battle occurred several
days after we got ashore and after we'd assaulted
the island of Lady. And we were inland, I would say,
we were several miles inland when this battle
occurred. The first sign to us was that our
division headquarters ceased to send naval
intelligence down to us. And we routinely, the
Navy would send the Army its intelligence. It
would send in basically where the main elements of
the fleet were, and intelligence on the enemy, and
that just stopped. Well, I guess initially nobody
thought much about it. Then we started getting
propaganda leaflets. The airplanes would, the
jet planes would started showing up. And they'd
fly over and drop leaflets? In some numbers. And
that's the first time that had ever happened to us.
Well, of course, we realized that we went up there
without any land-based aircraft, no Air Force
support, because we had to get that airfield at
Tacloban before they could come in. We had only
Navy carrier support. And the main thing we wanted
them to do was keep those Jap airplanes off of us and
provide close air support. Sure. So, yes, they
dropped during the early stages of that battle, as
it turned out, they dropped leaflets. I remember
one of General MacArthur's statements of his
strategy was that he would leapfrog back to the
Philippines and leave many of the Japanese
unchallenged Japanese formations. But it leads
them to wither on the vine. You remember reading
that? Well, they dropped leaflets saying we were
going to wither on the vine. Well, it was never very
seriously taken, but it did alert us to the fact
that they were going to try to pull something off.
But the real evidence of the battle and that it was
not all in our favor came when the
US Naval aircraft came into the Tacloban strip to
land because it didn't have a carrier to land on.
And I mean, they were stacking in there and some of
them were shot up and crash landing. It was a mess.
But also, most of them, of course, got down safely.
But they had, I really, I don't suppose I ever knew
how many. But later, it was clear that a number of
those carriers had been disabled. And we had a heck
of a lot of aircraft on that airfield just after he
was taken. It wasn't ready for him. Of course, you
can land a Navy plane on a dime, practically. So
then we were aware
and then started getting information that there
was a serious naval battle. But we were not
informed on how it went or how the opposing forces
deployed or anything until it was over. I'll say
this.
I say we. I think this was a typical outlook. We had
so much confidence in the U.S. Navy, even though
they were a little bit short in MacArthur's
territory because, you know, so much of the Navy
was roaming the vast areas of the sea toward Japan.
But we had such confidence in them that we really
weren't worried about it too much.
one scene there before the naval battle showed up
that tends to give you confidence. The enemy did
make an effort to bomb our beach, our ships on the
beach and to bomb our troop formations right after
we landed and assaulted and for the next few days
before this battle started.
I remember I was marching the battalion down a road
moving position and this whole formation of
Japanese bombers and fighters approached and six
little Navy Hellcats flew in and one by one just
knocked them down. It just looked like a shooting
gallery. Really? It was the most amazing piece of
air action that I saw in the whole war. Six of them.
They couldn't defend themselves? They couldn't
match those. The Zero fighter, they had a few to
protect that bunch of bombers. It never got to that
beach area, by the way.
There was nothing wrong with the Zero for
maneuverability and so forth as a fighter, but our
people just must have been better, a lot better.
And they knocked... I forget how many planes were
in that formation, but I'm talking about probably
12 or 16, something like that. Well, you know, we
just stood there admiring
this. We just stopped to watch it. Did you cheer?
Oh, yeah. You thought it was a football game. You'd
hear the troops.
But anyway, everything the Navy had done, they
were in such close support of us all the way from
Australia, including training in Australia. We
had great confidence. We never realized how
serious that battle was until it was all over. And
the Navy had acquitted itself beautifully. By
this time, the Japanese were starting to use the
Kamikazes. Did you hear anything about them? The
kamikazes, we heard about them, but
they were not a big factor in our operation down in
the Philippines. Where they became real serious
was when we were approaching Japan more closely,
say Okinawa and Saipan and so forth. Then is when
they really, as I recall, came into play. And you
can't criticize the people for that kamikaze
outlook
in a way you admire them, but of course the
difference in the way we would do it and the way they
did it, we put more value on the human life than they
did. As far as wasting the airplanes is concerned,
my gosh, look what we do when we send a missile off
now.
cost of money. That doesn't bother us, it's the
life that bothers us. Now what were some of the
problems that lay to you, military problems?
Well, I'm not sure I can give you a good critique,
but I can give you, from my small point of view, I was
second in command of a battalion, which means that
our battalion was in direct support of a cavalry
regiment. Usually it was the 8th Cavalry
Regiment.
We tied into the division artillery
headquarters, which was the fire support
coordination headquarters for the entire
division, whether it be artillery or naval
gunfire close air support. So the artillery did
have good communication and information on
what's going on. So I could still visualize what's
going on a little further away than my own outfit.
The biggest problem in the later campaign was
terrain, and that's often the case in war. And
later we'll get into the 1st Cavalry Division.
There's an air mobile, air assault, helicopter
maneuvered division, which freed us from the
terrain. There was a very poor road system in
Laney. And of course, we were there in the rainy
season. Getting from point A to point B, quite
apart from maneuver required, was a problem. The
prime mover for our 105 Howitzers and Arbitatins
and the others, too, was a little Caterpillar
tractor. The vehicle for carrying cargo, such as
ammunition and supplies, was the one-ton trailer
hooked behind Caterpillar tractors.
battery-sized unit had a little Caterpillar
tractor with a bulldozer blade on it, a bulldozer.
And that's how we licked the terrain. Gee whiz. And
you really couldn't move large numbers of wheeled
vehicles until the rains let up, you know, after
you'd had a certain amount of it. until some of the
roads were improved. Of course, that was too vast
an undertaking to support an operation in motion.
So I would say the terrain was the major problem.
How did you move your artillery? Pulled it with the
caterpillar tractors. We could go anywhere with
those caterpillar tractors, with a bulldozer to
help.
I don't think we had any real serious problems
in accomplishing our missions other than the
terrain. I think one of our great challenges, and
this is always a challenge in war and a much sought
after area of advantage, was intelligence. But
that was a problem from the word go with the
Japanese because it was just a very difficult
thing to take a prisoner. And that's your best
source of intelligence. And their discipline was
good. Ordinarily, you'll get, and we did get some,
but you'd get documents off the bodies of
casualties, enemy casualties. But
the prisoner was denied us. The general denied
your observation. And in those days, we didn't
have this Marvelous electronic means of
intelligence now, literally listening to the
enemy. So I'd say that was the greatest challenge.
Did you take any Japanese prisoners? Some. Did
they ever talk? Not many, and not many who really
knew much.
I recall that going back to our first operation,
our division commander, every commander wants
became so upset that he wasn't getting any
prisoners that he personally went to every
battalion commander deployed and ordered him,
get me a prisoner. Most of them got him one. But this
wasn't so much that we were not going to take
prisoners. It wasn't our rules. It was the
Japanese rules in two forms. One, they had fought
the war, and we'd been told this by everybody, the
Marines, and everybody else had been exposed to
them, that they're going to fight until they die.
And I believe this, that it was said, and I believe
it, that they were ordered, if they didn't die
fighting, that they commit suicide. And we know
that a number of them did that.
So it just resulted in bursting in casualties.
There weren't many that you could get your hands on
in the first place. And when your enemy is going to
fight to the death, you're probably going to kill
him, because you're probably going to have to kill
him before you can get your hands on him.
I guess we were as brutal as they were, but it was not
abolition, is what I'm saying.
And did any of your men become their prisoners?
There was only one known incident where we had some
people taken prisoners.
our own troops, and this was a matter of them being
overrun.
Many of our soldiers said they'd save the last
bullet for themselves, but I think when you get in
the heat of the battle, it's just not very likely.
But in that particular incident, we recovered the
soldiers, but they were all dead but one, and they
were recovered by immediate counterattack.
Maybe it doesn't make since, and the higher
commander never ordered it. But if anybody got
trapped, you know, if you had to fall back or if you
got pushed off to the flank and somebody wasn't
counted for, the local commander, if he had the
strength, he would just automatically
counterattack to go get that man. It was just sort
of a, what is it, an unwritten practice.
I admired them for that. Probably cost more
casualties. Maybe it doesn't, you know, maybe it
doesn't make much sense, but that's the way they
did it. That's the only case that I know where we
lost prisoners. And then the Japanese murder. But
the Japanese murder, except one was not killed.
Why wasn't he killed? Well, he'd been wounded. Oh.
They thought, I guess they'd done him in, but Was
there a lot of hatred then? Oh yes, of course.
That was the nature of that war. And I must say that
our people all hated the North Vietnamese almost
as much. You hate all your enemies when you're
about to kill each other. Sure. There's no other
way.
so-called gentleman's war that was fought in
Europe, I doubt if you were to find yourself in the
company on the front line that you'd see much
gentlemanly about it. The generals can be
courteous and all that, but not the guys up there
that got a beat on each other.
It's 5.15. Do you want to take a break? Okay.